compact block filter post (#3)
dev-bitcoin/blog: content/blog/bip158-deep-dive.md

---

title: "Compact Block Filters Deep Dive (BIP 158)"
subtitle: "A technical explanation of the workings of compact block filters and Golomb-Rice Coding"
date: 2021-11-13T09:32:00+02:00
authors:
  - name: Elle Mouton
    github: ellemouton
    twitter: ellemouton
tags:
  - "BIP158"
  - "Compact block filters"
  - "Bitcoin light client"

images:
  - "/post-data/compact-block-filters/cover.png"

---

In this post, I will briefly describe the needs of a bitcoin light client and
why compact block filters satisfy these needs better than Bloom filters do. Then
I will dive into exactly how compact block filters work and will follow this

> with a step by step guide for constucting such a filter from a testnet block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a step by step guide for constructing such a filter from a testnet block.
```

#### The purpose of block filters

A bitcoin light client is software that can back a bitcoin wallet without storing the blockchain. This means that it needs to be able to broadcast transactions to the network but most importantly it must be able to pick up when there is a new transaction that is relevant to the wallet it is backing. There are two ways a transaction becomes relevant to a wallet: either it is sending money to the wallet (creating a new output to a wallet address) or it is spending one of the UTXOs that the wallet owns.

#### What was wrong with Bloom filters?

> Before [BIP 158] came along, the most widely used method for light clients was to use Bloom filters[^bloomfilters] as described in [BIP 37]. With a bloom filter, you take all the objects you are interested in (script pub keys spent or created), hash them a couple times and add the result of each to a bit map called a Bloom filter. This filter represents what you are interested in. You would then send this filter to a trusted bitcoin node and ask them to send you anything that matches your filter. The problem with this is that it is not very private since you are revealing some information to the bitcoin node you are sending this filter too. They can start getting an idea of the transactions you are interested in as well as the ones you are definitely not interested in. They can also just decide not to send you a transaction that matches the filter. So as you can see, it isn’t great for the light client. But it is also not great for the bitcoin node serving the light client. Each time you send them a filter, they have to load the relevant block from disk and determine which transactions match your filter. You could just spam them with fake filters and effectively DOS them. It takes very little energy to create a filter and lots to respond to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before [BIP 158] came along, the most widely used method for light clients was to use Bloom filters[^bloomfilters] as described in [BIP 37]. With a bloom filter, you take all the objects you are interested in (script pub keys spent or created), hash them a couple times and add the result of each to a bit map called a Bloom filter. This filter represents what you are interested in. You would then send this filter to a trusted bitcoin node and ask them to send you anything that matches your filter. The problem with this is that it is not very private since you are revealing some information to the bitcoin node you are sending this filter to. They can start getting an idea of the transactions you are interested in as well as the ones you are definitely not interested in. They can also just decide not to send you a transaction that matches the filter. So as you can see, it isn’t great for the light client. But it is also not great for the bitcoin node serving the light client. Each time you send them a filter, they have to load the relevant block from disk and determine which transactions match your filter. You could just spam them with fake filters and effectively DOS them. It takes very little energy to create a filter and lots to respond to it.
```

Ugh, the diff here is 

``` diff
- node you are sending this filter too. 
+ node you are sending this filter to. 
```

the numbers in the space can range from 0 to N * M, but the difference between
each number (once ordered) will be roughly M. M will definitely be a smaller
number to store than a number in the N * M space. So what we can do is instead
of storing each number, we can instead store the difference of each successive
number. In the above case, this would mean that instead of storing `[0, 5, 10,
15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50]`, we just store `[0, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5]`
and then it is trivial to reconstruct the original list. As you can gather,
storing the number 50 requires way more bits than storing the number 5. But why
stop there? We can compress this even further!

This is where Golomb-Rice Coding comes in. This encoding works well for a list
of numbers that will all very likely be close to some number. This is what we
have! We have a list of numbers that will all very likely be close to 5 (or, in
general, close to our FP rate of M) and so taking the quotient of any number in
the list with that number (dividing each number by 5 and ignoring the remainder)
will very likely be 0 (if the number is slightly less than 5) or 1 if the number

> is slight more than 5. The quotient could be 2, 3 etc but the likelihood

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is slightly more than 5. The quotient could be 2, 3, etc, but the likelihood
```

decreases a lot. Great! So we can take advantage of this knowledge and say that
we will encode a small quotient with the smallest number of bits that we can and

> use more bits to encode larger, unlikely, quotients. Then we also need to encode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use more bits to encode larger, unlikely quotients. Then we also need to encode
```

> the remainders (since we want to be able to reconstruct the values exactly) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the remainders (since we want to be able to reconstruct the values exactly), and
```

these will always be numbers between [0, M-1] (in our case, [0, 4]). For
encoding the quotients, we use the following mapping:

{{< center-figure src="/post-data/compact-block-filters/quotient.png" caption="" height=125 width=125 >}}

The mapping above is easy to read: The number of `1`s indicates the quotient we

> are encoding and the `0` indicates the end of the quotient encoding. So for each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are, encoding and the `0` indicates the end of the quotient encoding. So for each
```

> number in our list, we encode the quotient using the above table and then we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number in our list, we encode the quotient using the above table, and then we
```

convert the remainder to binary using the number of bits needed to encode the
maximum of M-1. In our case, that is 3 bits. Here is a table showing the
encoding of the possible remainders in our example:

{{< center-figure src="/post-data/compact-block-filters/remainder.png" caption="" height=125 width=125 >}}

So, in our ideal case example, our list of `[0, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5]`
can be encoded as follows:
```go
0000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000 10000
```

Before we move on to a more realistic example, let’s see if we can reconstruct
our original list from this filter.

Ok so we have: “0000100001000010000100001000010000100001000010000”. We know how
Golomb-Rice Coding encodes quotients and we also know that M is 5 (since this
will be public knowledge known to everyone using this filter construction).
Since we know M is 5, we know that 3 bits will be used to encode the remainders.
So we can take our filter and produce the following quotient-remainder tuples:

```go
[(0, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0)]
```

> We know that the quotients were produced by dividing number by M (5), so we can

Reviewer: did you meant to write this?
```suggestion
We know that the quotients were produced by dividing the number by M (5), so we can
```

reconstruct these:

```go
[0, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5]
```

And we know that this list represents differences of numbers, so we can
reconstruct the OG list:

```go
[0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50]
```

#### A more realistic example

We will now try to construct a filter from an actual Bitcoin testnet block. I'm

> going to use block [2101914]. Let’s see what it’s actual filter is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
going to use block [2101914]. Let’s see what its actual filter is:
```

```
$ bitcoin-cli getblockhash 2101914
000000000000002c06f9afaf2b2b066d4f814ff60cfbc4df55840975a00e035c

$ bitcoin-cli getblockfilter 000000000000002c06f9afaf2b2b066d4f814ff60cfbc4df55840975a00e035c
```
```json
{
  "filter": "5571d126b85aa79c9de56d55995aa292de0484b830680a735793a8c2260113148421279906f800c3b8c94ff37681fb1fd230482518c52df57437864023833f2f801639692646ddcd7976ae4f2e2a1ef58c79b3aed6a705415255e362581692831374a5e5e70d5501cdc0a52095206a15cd2eb98ac980c22466e6945a65a5b0b0c5b32aa1e0cda2545da2c4345e049b614fcad80b9dc9c903788163822f4361bbb8755b79c276b1cf7952148de1e5ee0a92f6d70c4f522aa6877558f62b34b56ade12fa2e61023abf3e570937bf379722bc1b0dc06ffa1c5835bb651b9346a270",
  "header": "8d0cd8353342930209ac7027be150e679bbc7c65cc62bb8392968e43a6ea3bfe"
}
```

Ok shweeeeeet, let’s see if we can reconstruct this filter from the block.

The full code for this can be found in this [github repo]. I will just show some
pseudo code snippets here. The beef of the code is the function called

> `constructFilter` which takes in a bitcoin client that can be used to make calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`constructFilter`, which takes in a bitcoin client that can be used to make calls
```

to bitcoind and the block in question. The function looks something like this:

```go
func constructFilter(bc *bitcoind.Bitcoind, block bitcoind.Block) ([]byte, error) {
	// 1. Collect all the objects from the block that we want to add to the filter

	// 2. Convert all the objects to numbers and sort them. 

	// 3. Get the differences between the sorted numbers

	// 4. Encode these differences using Golomb-Rice Coding
}
```

Ok so step 1 is to collect all the objects from the block that we want to add to
the filter. From the BIP, we know that these objects are all the scriptPubKeys
being spent as well as all the scriptPubKeys of each output. Some extra rules
from the BIP are that we skip the input for the coinbase transaction (since it

> is empty and meaningless) and we skip any OP_RETURN outputs. We also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is empty and meaningless), and we skip any OP_RETURN outputs. We also
```

        if i == 0 {
                continue
        }

        // For each input, go and fetch the scriptPubKey that it is
        // spending.
        for _, txIn := range tx.Vin {
                prevTx, err := bc.GetRawTransaction(txIn.Txid)
                if err != nil {
                        return nil, err
                }

                scriptPubKey := prevTx.Vout[txIn.Vout].ScriptPubKey

                if len(scriptPubKey) == 0 {
                        continue
                }

                objects[spkStr] = struct{}{}
        }
}

```

Ok great, we have all the objects we care about. And now we can also define the
variable N to be the length of the `objects` map. In this example, N is 85.

The next step is to convert each of the objects to numbers spread uniformly
across a range. Remember that this range depends on the false-positive rate we
want. BIP158 defines the constant M to be 784931. This means that we want every
1/784931 matches to be a false-positive. As we did in our earlier example, we
take this fp rate of M and multiply it by N to get the range that we want all
our numbers to lie in. We define this as F where F = M\*N. In our case, we have

> 85 objects and so F=66719135. I am not going to go into the details of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
85 objects, and so F=66719135. I am not going to go into the details of the
```

function used to map our objects to numbers (you can check out the details of
this in the code in the linked repo). All you need to know for now is that it

> takes in an object, the constant F which defines the range that it needs to map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
takes in an object, the constant F, which defines the range that it needs to map
```

the object to, and a key which is the block hash. Once we have all the numbers,

> we sort the list in ascending order and then we also create a new list called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we sort the list in ascending order, and then we also create a new list called
```

// range [0, F] and add them to the `numbers` list.
for o := range objects {
        // Using the given key, max number (F) and object bytes (o),
        // convert the object to a number between 0 and F.
        v := convertToNumber(b, F, key)

        numbers = append(numbers, v)
}

// Sort the numbers.
sort.Slice(numbers, func(i, j int) bool { return numbers[i] < numbers[j] })

// Convert the list of numbers to a list of differences.
differences := make([]uint64, N)
for i, num := range numbers {
        if i == 0 {
                differences[i] = num
                continue
        }

        differences[i] = num - numbers[i-1]
}
```

Awesome! Here is a graph showing the values in the `numbers` and `differences`
lists:

{{< center-figure src="/post-data/compact-block-filters/bitcoinExample.png" caption="" height=600 width=600 >}}

As you can see, the 85 numbers are really nicely uniformly distributed across
the space! And this results in the values in the `differences` list being pretty
small. 

The last step now is to use Golomb-Rice Coding to encode this `differences`
list. Recall from the earlier explanation that we need to divide each difference

> by it’s most likely value and then we encode that quotient along with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by its most likely value and then we encode that quotient along with the
```

> remainder. In my earlier example I said that this most-likely value would be the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remainder. In my earlier example, I said that this most-likely value would be the
```

M that we choose and that the remainder would then lie in the range [0, M].
However, this is not what is done in the BIP as it was found[^golombloss] that

> this is in fact not the ideal way to choose the Golomb-Rice coder parameter when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this is, in fact, not the ideal way to choose the Golomb-Rice coder parameter when
```

trying to optimize for the smallest possible size of the final encoded filter.

> And so instead of using M, a new constant of P is defined and P^2 is used as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And so, instead of using M, a new constant of P is defined and P^2 is used as the
```

        // '1's we encounter before reaching the '0' defines the 
        // quotient.
        var q uint64
        c, err := b.ReadBit()
        if err != nil {
                return err
        }

        for c {
                q++
                c, err = b.ReadBit()
                if errors.Is(err, io.EOF) {
                        break
                } else if err != nil {
                        return err
                }
        }

        // The following P bits are the remainder encoded as binary.
        r, err := b.ReadBits(P)
        if errors.Is(err, io.EOF) {
                break
        } else if err != nil {
                return err
        }

        n := q*uint64(math.Exp2(float64(P))) + r

        num :=  n + prevNum
        numbers = append(numbers, num)
        prevNum = num
}

fmt.Println(numbers)
```

The above produces the same list of numbers that we had before and we were able
to reconstruct this without the knowledge of N. So I am not sure why it was
decided that N should be added to the filter. If anyone knows why it was
required to add N to the filter, please let me know!

> Cool, that was fun! Thanks for reading. This is a [cross-post] from my [website]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cool, that was fun! Thanks for reading. This is a [cross-post] from my [website],
```
